README.md, before:

The Mellifera Programming Language
==================================

Mellifera is a simple, modern, batteries-included scripting language featuring
value semantics, structural equality, copy-on-write data sharing, strong
dynamic typing, explicit references, and a lightweight nominal type system with
structural protocols.

```mellifera
println("Hello, world!");
```

```sh
$ mf examples/hello-world.mf
Hello, world!
```

Mellifera aims to be an enjoyable language for writing small scripts and CLI
utilities while still providing reasonable tools to develop larger projects.
Here is an example word counting program in Mellifera showcasing some of the
syntax and semantics of the language.

```mellifera
let help = function(writeln) {
    writeln($```
usage: {argv[0]} [file]

positional arguments:
  file          Text file to process (defaults to stdin).

optional arguments:
      --json    Output results as a JSON object.
      --top=n   Output only the top n words.
  -h, --help    Display this help text and exit.
    ```.trim());
};

let file = null;
let text = null;
let fmt = null;
let top = null;
let argi = 1;
while argi < argv.count() {
    if argv[argi] =~ r`^-+json$` {
        fmt = "json";
        argi = argi + 1;
        continue;
    }
    if argv[argi] =~ r`^-+top(=(.*))?$` {
        if re::group(2) != null {
            top = number::init(re::group(2));
        }
        else {
            argi = argi + 1;
            top = number::init(argv[argi]);
        }
        argi = argi + 1;
        continue;
    }
    if argv[argi] =~ r`^-+h(elp)?$` {
        help(println);
        exit(0);
    }

    if file != null and text != null {
        error $"multiple input files, {file} and {argv[argi]}";
    }
    file = argv[argi];
    text = fs::read(file);
    argi = argi + 1;
}
if file == null and text == null {
    file = "<stdin>";
    text = input();
}

let occurrences = Map{};
let words = re::split(text, r`\s+`)
    .into_iterator()
    .map(function(word) {
        return re::replace(word.to_lower(), r`[^\w]`, "");
    })
    .filter(function(word) {
        return word.count() != 0;
    });
for word in words {
    if occurrences.contains(word) {
        occurrences[word] = occurrences[word] + 1;
        continue;
    }
    occurrences[word] = 1;
}

let ordered = occurrences
    .pairs()
    .sorted_by(function(lhs, rhs) {
        return rhs.value - lhs.value;
    })
    .into_iterator()
    .map(function(pair) {
        return {
            .word = pair.key,
            .count = pair.value,
        };
    }).into_vector();

if top != null {
    ordered = ordered.slice(0, min(top, ordered.count()));
}

if fmt == "json" {
    let map = Map{};
    for x in ordered {
        map[x.word] = x.count;
    }
    println(json::encode(map));
}
else {
    for x in ordered {
        println($"{x.word} {x.count}");
    }
}
```

```sh
$ curl -s https://www.gutenberg.org/files/71/71-0.txt | mf examples/word-count.mf --top 5
the 692
to 440
and 418
of 391
a 293
$ curl -s https://www.gutenberg.org/files/71/71-0.txt | mf examples/word-count.mf --top=10 --json
{"the": 692, "to": 440, "and": 418, "of": 391, "a": 293, "it": 212, "i": 188, "in": 181, "is": 173, "not": 171}
```

Mellifera uses value semantics, meaning assignment operations copy the contents
(i.e. the "value") of an object when executed. After an assignment statement
such as `a = b`, the objects `a` and `b` will contain separate copies of the
same value. Mellifera also performs equality comparisons based on structural
equality, so two objects are considered to be equal if they have the same
contents.

```mellifera
let x = ["foo", {"bar": 123}, "baz"];
let y = x; # x is assigned to y by copy
println($`x is {x}`);
println($`y is {y}`);
# x and y are separate values that are structurally equal
println($`x == y is {x == y}`);

print("\n");

# updates to x and y do not affect each other, because they are separate values
x[0] = "abc";
y[1]["bar"] = "xyz";
println($`x is {x}`);
println($`y is {y}`);
# x and y are no longer structurally equal as their contents now differ
println($`x == y is {x == y}`);

print("\n");

let z = ["foo", {"bar": "xyz"}, "baz"];
println($`z is {z}`);
# y and z are separate values with structural equality
println($`y == z is {y == z}`);
```

```sh
$ mf examples/value-semantics-and-structural-equality.mf
x is ["foo", {"bar": 123}, "baz"]
y is ["foo", {"bar": 123}, "baz"]
x == y is true

x is ["abc", {"bar": 123}, "baz"]
y is ["foo", {"bar": "xyz"}, "baz"]
x == y is false

z is ["foo", {"bar": "xyz"}, "baz"]
y == z is true
```

Unlike most scripting languages, in which reference semantics are the default
way of assigning and passing around composite data, Mellifera uses value
semantics with explicit references. One may obtain a reference to a value using
the postfix `.&` operator, then later dereference that reference-object to get
the original value using the postfix `.*` operator.

```mellifera
let pass_by_value = function(val) {
    println($"[inside pass_by_value] val starts as {val}");

    # Here val is a copy, so the mutation performed by `val.push` will not
    # change the original value outside of this function's lexical scope.
    val.push(123);

    println($"[inside pass_by_value] val ends as {val}");
};

let pass_by_reference = function(ref) {
    println($"[inside pass_by_reference] ref starts as {ref} with referenced value {ref.*}");

    # Here ref is a reference to the original value outside of this function's
    # lexical scope, so mutation performed by `ref.*.push` will change that
    # original value.
    ref.*.push(123); # .* is the postfix dereference operator

    println($"[inside pass_by_reference] ref ends as {ref} with referenced value {ref.*}");
};

let x = ["foo", "bar", "baz"];
println($"[outside pass_by_value] x starts as {x}");
pass_by_value(x);
println($"[outside pass_by_value] x ends as {x}");

print("\n");

let y = ["abc", "def", "hij"];
println($"[outside pass_by_reference] y starts as {y}");
pass_by_reference(y.&); # .& is the postfix addressof operator
println($"[outside pass_by_reference] y ends as {y}");
```

```sh
$ mf examples/explicit-references.mf
[outside pass_by_value] x starts as ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
[inside pass_by_value] val starts as ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
[inside pass_by_value] val ends as ["foo", "bar", "baz", 123]
[outside pass_by_value] x ends as ["foo", "bar", "baz"]

[outside pass_by_reference] y starts as ["abc", "def", "hij"]
[inside pass_by_reference] ref starts as reference@0x101f4c290 with referenced value ["abc", "def", "hij"]
[inside pass_by_reference] ref ends as reference@0x101f4c290 with referenced value ["abc", "def", "hij", 123]
[outside pass_by_reference] y ends as ["abc", "def", "hij", 123]
```

Mellifera contains a small number of core builtin types, all of which have
first-class language support: null, boolean, number, string, regular
expression, vector, map, set, reference, and function. These builtin types are
sufficient for most simple programs, but when the need arises for more
structured data, users have the option to define custom types with specific
behavior.

```mellifera
let vec2 = type {
    "fixed": function(self, ndigits) {
        return new vec2 {
            .x = self.x.fixed(ndigits),
            .y = self.y.fixed(ndigits),
        };
    },
    "magnitude": function(self) {
        return math::sqrt(self.x * self.x + self.y * self.y);
    },
};

let va = new vec2 {.x = 3, .y = 4};
println($`va is {va} with type {typename(va)}`);
println($`va.magnitude() is {va.magnitude()}`);

print("\n");

let vb = new vec2 {.x = math::e, .y = -math::pi};
println($`vb is {vb} with type {typename(vb)}`);
println($`vb.magnitude() is {vb.magnitude()}`);
println($`vb.fixed(3) is {vb.fixed(3)}`);
```

```sh
$ mf examples/user-defined-types.mf
va is {"x": 3, "y": 4} with type vec2
va.magnitude() is 5

vb is {"x": 2.718281828459045, "y": -3.141592653589793} with type vec2
vb.magnitude() is 4.154354402313313
vb.fixed(3) is {"x": 2.718, "y": -3.142}
```

```mellifera
let fizzbuzzer = type extends(iterator, {
    "init": function(n, max) {
        return new fizzbuzzer {"n": n, "max": max};
    },
    "next": function(self) {
        let n = self.n;
        if n > self.max {
            error null; # error null signals end-of-iteration
        }
        self.n = self.n + 1;
        if n % 3 == 0 and n % 5 == 0 {
            return "fizzbuzz";
        }
        if n % 3 == 0 {
            return "fizz";
        }
        if n % 5 == 0 {
            return "buzz";
        }
        return n;
    },
});

let fb = fizzbuzzer::init(1, 15);
for x in fb {
    println(x);
}
```

```sh
$ mf examples/user-defined-iterators.mf
1
2
fizz
4
buzz
fizz
7
8
fizz
buzz
11
fizz
13
14
fizzbuzz
```

Mellifera is intended to be a practical language with reasonable
exception-based error handling and pleasant top-level error traces for when
things go wrong.

```mellifera
try {
    fs::read("/path/to/file/that/does/not/exist.txt");
}
catch err {
    println($"error: {err}");
}

print("\n");

let g = function() {
    let f = function() {
        error "oopsie";
    };
    f();
};
function() {
    let h = function() {
        g();
    };
    h();
}();
```

```sh
$ mf examples/exceptions.mf
error: failed to read file "/path/to/file/that/does/not/exist.txt"

[examples/exceptions.mf, line 12] error: oopsie
...within f@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 11] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 14
...within g@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 10] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 18
...within h@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 17] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 20
...within function@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 16] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 21
```

A brief language overview can be found in `overview.mf`, and additional example
programs can be found under the `examples` directory.

## Development

```sh
python3 -m venv .venv-mellifera
. .venv-mellifera/bin/activate
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
MELLIFERA_HOME=$(pwd)
. ./env

make check   # run tests
make lint    # lint with mypy and flake8
make format  # format using black
make build   # build standalone executable
make install # install standalone mellifera tooling
```

## Installing

Install Mellifera and associated tooling into the directory specified by
`MELLIFERA_HOME` (default `$HOME/.mellifera`):

```sh
make install                               # Install to the default $HOME/.mellifera
make install MELLIFERA_HOME=/opt/mellifera # Install to /opt/mellifera
```

Then, add the following snippet to your `.profile`, replacing `$HOME/.mellifera`
with your chosen `MELLIFERA_HOME` directory if installing to a non-default
`MELLIFERA_HOME` location:

```sh
export MELLIFERA_HOME="$HOME/.mellifera"
if [ -e "$MELLIFERA_HOME/env" ]; then
    . "$MELLIFERA_HOME/env"
fi
```

After sourcing your `.profile`, verify that the standalone Mellifera
interpreter `mf` was installed with:

```sh
$ printf 'println("Hello world!");' | mf /dev/stdin
Hello world!
```

## License

All content in this repository, unless otherwise noted, is licensed under the
Zero-Clause BSD license.

See LICENSE for more information.

Commit message:

Add the Mellifera logo to the top of the README
The Mellifera logo and Melli character design are courtesy of Natalie
Jara. Thank you Natalie!

README.md, after:

![The Mellifera Programming Language](https://ashn.dev/mellifera/mellifera-logo.svg)

Mellifera is a simple, modern, batteries-included scripting language featuring
value semantics, structural equality, copy-on-write data sharing, strong
dynamic typing, explicit references, and a lightweight nominal type system with
structural protocols.

```mellifera
println("Hello, world!");
```

```sh
$ mf examples/hello-world.mf
Hello, world!
```

Mellifera aims to be an enjoyable language for writing small scripts and CLI
utilities while still providing reasonable tools to develop larger projects.
Here is an example word counting program in Mellifera showcasing some of the
syntax and semantics of the language.

```mellifera
let help = function(writeln) {
    writeln($```
usage: {argv[0]} [file]

positional arguments:
  file          Text file to process (defaults to stdin).

optional arguments:
      --json    Output results as a JSON object.
      --top=n   Output only the top n words.
  -h, --help    Display this help text and exit.
    ```.trim());
};

let file = null;
let text = null;
let fmt = null;
let top = null;
let argi = 1;
while argi < argv.count() {
    if argv[argi] =~ r`^-+json$` {
        fmt = "json";
        argi = argi + 1;
        continue;
    }
    if argv[argi] =~ r`^-+top(=(.*))?$` {
        if re::group(2) != null {
            top = number::init(re::group(2));
        }
        else {
            argi = argi + 1;
            top = number::init(argv[argi]);
        }
        argi = argi + 1;
        continue;
    }
    if argv[argi] =~ r`^-+h(elp)?$` {
        help(println);
        exit(0);
    }

    if file != null and text != null {
        error $"multiple input files, {file} and {argv[argi]}";
    }
    file = argv[argi];
    text = fs::read(file);
    argi = argi + 1;
}
if file == null and text == null {
    file = "<stdin>";
    text = input();
}

let occurrences = Map{};
let words = re::split(text, r`\s+`)
    .into_iterator()
    .map(function(word) {
        return re::replace(word.to_lower(), r`[^\w]`, "");
    })
    .filter(function(word) {
        return word.count() != 0;
    });
for word in words {
    if occurrences.contains(word) {
        occurrences[word] = occurrences[word] + 1;
        continue;
    }
    occurrences[word] = 1;
}

let ordered = occurrences
    .pairs()
    .sorted_by(function(lhs, rhs) {
        return rhs.value - lhs.value;
    })
    .into_iterator()
    .map(function(pair) {
        return {
            .word = pair.key,
            .count = pair.value,
        };
    }).into_vector();

if top != null {
    ordered = ordered.slice(0, min(top, ordered.count()));
}

if fmt == "json" {
    let map = Map{};
    for x in ordered {
        map[x.word] = x.count;
    }
    println(json::encode(map));
}
else {
    for x in ordered {
        println($"{x.word} {x.count}");
    }
}
```

```sh
$ curl -s https://www.gutenberg.org/files/71/71-0.txt | mf examples/word-count.mf --top 5
the 692
to 440
and 418
of 391
a 293
$ curl -s https://www.gutenberg.org/files/71/71-0.txt | mf examples/word-count.mf --top=10 --json
{"the": 692, "to": 440, "and": 418, "of": 391, "a": 293, "it": 212, "i": 188, "in": 181, "is": 173, "not": 171}
```

Mellifera uses value semantics, meaning assignment operations copy the contents
(i.e. the "value") of an object when executed. After an assignment statement
such as `a = b`, the objects `a` and `b` will contain separate copies of the
same value. Mellifera also performs equality comparisons based on structural
equality, so two objects are considered to be equal if they have the same
contents.

```mellifera
let x = ["foo", {"bar": 123}, "baz"];
let y = x; # x is assigned to y by copy
println($`x is {x}`);
println($`y is {y}`);
# x and y are separate values that are structurally equal
println($`x == y is {x == y}`);

print("\n");

# updates to x and y do not affect each other, because they are separate values
x[0] = "abc";
y[1]["bar"] = "xyz";
println($`x is {x}`);
println($`y is {y}`);
# x and y are no longer structurally equal as their contents now differ
println($`x == y is {x == y}`);

print("\n");

let z = ["foo", {"bar": "xyz"}, "baz"];
println($`z is {z}`);
# y and z are separate values with structural equality
println($`y == z is {y == z}`);
```

```sh
$ mf examples/value-semantics-and-structural-equality.mf
x is ["foo", {"bar": 123}, "baz"]
y is ["foo", {"bar": 123}, "baz"]
x == y is true

x is ["abc", {"bar": 123}, "baz"]
y is ["foo", {"bar": "xyz"}, "baz"]
x == y is false

z is ["foo", {"bar": "xyz"}, "baz"]
y == z is true
```

Unlike most scripting languages, in which reference semantics are the default
way of assigning and passing around composite data, Mellifera uses value
semantics with explicit references. One may obtain a reference to a value using
the postfix `.&` operator, then later dereference that reference-object to get
the original value using the postfix `.*` operator.

```mellifera
let pass_by_value = function(val) {
    println($"[inside pass_by_value] val starts as {val}");

    # Here val is a copy, so the mutation performed by `val.push` will not
    # change the original value outside of this function's lexical scope.
    val.push(123);

    println($"[inside pass_by_value] val ends as {val}");
};

let pass_by_reference = function(ref) {
    println($"[inside pass_by_reference] ref starts as {ref} with referenced value {ref.*}");

    # Here ref is a reference to the original value outside of this function's
    # lexical scope, so mutation performed by `ref.*.push` will change that
    # original value.
    ref.*.push(123); # .* is the postfix dereference operator

    println($"[inside pass_by_reference] ref ends as {ref} with referenced value {ref.*}");
};

let x = ["foo", "bar", "baz"];
println($"[outside pass_by_value] x starts as {x}");
pass_by_value(x);
println($"[outside pass_by_value] x ends as {x}");

print("\n");

let y = ["abc", "def", "hij"];
println($"[outside pass_by_reference] y starts as {y}");
pass_by_reference(y.&); # .& is the postfix addressof operator
println($"[outside pass_by_reference] y ends as {y}");
```

```sh
$ mf examples/explicit-references.mf
[outside pass_by_value] x starts as ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
[inside pass_by_value] val starts as ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
[inside pass_by_value] val ends as ["foo", "bar", "baz", 123]
[outside pass_by_value] x ends as ["foo", "bar", "baz"]

[outside pass_by_reference] y starts as ["abc", "def", "hij"]
[inside pass_by_reference] ref starts as reference@0x101f4c290 with referenced value ["abc", "def", "hij"]
[inside pass_by_reference] ref ends as reference@0x101f4c290 with referenced value ["abc", "def", "hij", 123]
[outside pass_by_reference] y ends as ["abc", "def", "hij", 123]
```

Mellifera contains a small number of core builtin types, all of which have
first-class language support: null, boolean, number, string, regular
expression, vector, map, set, reference, and function. These builtin types are
sufficient for most simple programs, but when the need arises for more
structured data, users have the option to define custom types with specific
behavior.

```mellifera
let vec2 = type {
    "fixed": function(self, ndigits) {
        return new vec2 {
            .x = self.x.fixed(ndigits),
            .y = self.y.fixed(ndigits),
        };
    },
    "magnitude": function(self) {
        return math::sqrt(self.x * self.x + self.y * self.y);
    },
};

let va = new vec2 {.x = 3, .y = 4};
println($`va is {va} with type {typename(va)}`);
println($`va.magnitude() is {va.magnitude()}`);

print("\n");

let vb = new vec2 {.x = math::e, .y = -math::pi};
println($`vb is {vb} with type {typename(vb)}`);
println($`vb.magnitude() is {vb.magnitude()}`);
println($`vb.fixed(3) is {vb.fixed(3)}`);
```

```sh
$ mf examples/user-defined-types.mf
va is {"x": 3, "y": 4} with type vec2
va.magnitude() is 5

vb is {"x": 2.718281828459045, "y": -3.141592653589793} with type vec2
vb.magnitude() is 4.154354402313313
vb.fixed(3) is {"x": 2.718, "y": -3.142}
```

```mellifera
let fizzbuzzer = type extends(iterator, {
    "init": function(n, max) {
        return new fizzbuzzer {"n": n, "max": max};
    },
    "next": function(self) {
        let n = self.n;
        if n > self.max {
            error null; # error null signals end-of-iteration
        }
        self.n = self.n + 1;
        if n % 3 == 0 and n % 5 == 0 {
            return "fizzbuzz";
        }
        if n % 3 == 0 {
            return "fizz";
        }
        if n % 5 == 0 {
            return "buzz";
        }
        return n;
    },
});

let fb = fizzbuzzer::init(1, 15);
for x in fb {
    println(x);
}
```

```sh
$ mf examples/user-defined-iterators.mf
1
2
fizz
4
buzz
fizz
7
8
fizz
buzz
11
fizz
13
14
fizzbuzz
```

Mellifera is intended to be a practical language with reasonable
exception-based error handling and pleasant top-level error traces for when
things go wrong.

```mellifera
try {
    fs::read("/path/to/file/that/does/not/exist.txt");
}
catch err {
    println($"error: {err}");
}

print("\n");

let g = function() {
    let f = function() {
        error "oopsie";
    };
    f();
};
function() {
    let h = function() {
        g();
    };
    h();
}();
```

```sh
$ mf examples/exceptions.mf
error: failed to read file "/path/to/file/that/does/not/exist.txt"

[examples/exceptions.mf, line 12] error: oopsie
...within f@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 11] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 14
...within g@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 10] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 18
...within h@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 17] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 20
...within function@[examples/exceptions.mf, line 16] called from examples/exceptions.mf, line 21
```

A brief language overview can be found in `overview.mf`, and additional example
programs can be found under the `examples` directory.

## Development

```sh
python3 -m venv .venv-mellifera
. .venv-mellifera/bin/activate
python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
MELLIFERA_HOME=$(pwd)
. ./env

make check   # run tests
make lint    # lint with mypy and flake8
make format  # format using black
make build   # build standalone executable
make install # install standalone mellifera tooling
```

## Installing

Install Mellifera and associated tooling into the directory specified by
`MELLIFERA_HOME` (default `$HOME/.mellifera`):

```sh
make install                               # Install to the default $HOME/.mellifera
make install MELLIFERA_HOME=/opt/mellifera # Install to /opt/mellifera
```

Then, add the following snippet to your `.profile`, replacing `$HOME/.mellifera`
with your chosen `MELLIFERA_HOME` directory if installing to a non-default
`MELLIFERA_HOME` location:

```sh
export MELLIFERA_HOME="$HOME/.mellifera"
if [ -e "$MELLIFERA_HOME/env" ]; then
    . "$MELLIFERA_HOME/env"
fi
```

After sourcing your `.profile`, verify that the standalone Mellifera
interpreter `mf` was installed with:

```sh
$ printf 'println("Hello world!");' | mf /dev/stdin
Hello world!
```

## License and Credits

All content in this repository, unless otherwise noted, is licensed under the
Zero-Clause BSD license.

See LICENSE for more information.

The Mellifera logo and Melli character were designed by Natalie Jara.
